[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How old are you could soon
become an outdated question.
As people begin to implement
longevity and life extension
therapies, their
biological age might soon
become quite different from
their chronological age.
According to scientists,
in just a few decades,
100 years old could
become the new 50.
>> The problem with
aging is everyone knows
their chronological age.
But, really, what aging
researchers are interested in
is this concept
of biological age.
So this is why we see
the rise in disease
or the increase in mortality
risk as a function of age.
And it's this kind
of divergence, again,
away from this optimal state.
>> So the best way to keep track
of whether your lifestyle is
conducive to longevity is
with a biological age clock.
So there are multiple forms
of biological age clocks
out there right now,
but the most accurate
currently are epigenetic clocks.
>> It's absolutely possible
to reverse the biological age,
and that has actually recently
been accomplished by several
groups.
So there are two recent studies.
One, these are randomized
controlled trials that
were performed on older people.
Those people had
their biological age
measured using one of
these biological clocks,
molecular clocks.
And then they were put
on some kind of a program
to try to slow down
or reverse the aging
for a certain number of months.
And so the two trials that I
can remember very recently,
one used the human
growth hormone
and in just a few
months, they were
able to not just slow
down aging, but actually
reverse it by two years
in a group of people.
Now, human growth hormone is
sort of a controversial drug
because it can also cause
cancer so it's not something
that everyone
would like to take.
But in another trial, people
used alpha ketoglutarate,
and that's just a
normal supplement.
They did sort of
overdose it a little bit.
They used several grams
per day for several months.
But in that short
period, they actually
showed that they can not just
slow down aging, but reverse it
significantly.
I think it was something by a
year and a half or two years
reversal in a few months.
>> Let's take a guy
who's 55 years old.
He's 40 pounds overweight,
his cholesterol is sky high,
his LDL is are high.
He's out of breath.
He's in terrible shape.
His sexual function
is in the toilet.
The guy's a mess.
We put him on the
right kind of program.
We do HRT, hormone
replacement therapy, on him.
We change his diet, he
loses the 40 pounds,
his cholesterol comes down,
his LDL has come down,
his HDL has come up.
All of a sudden, this
guy, physiologically,
is a different person.
>> What if one day
we could stop aging?
And what would happen
when we get to that stage?
Do we become immortal?
What would that even look like?
>> Well, it's amazing that we
as humanity have always had this
fascination for living forever.
And that fascination
has never died.
We are definitely at the cusp
of increasing our life span
and health span.
There is no doubt in my mind.
There is nothing in our body
that says that when we turn 100,
we must die, or
130 or 150 or 200.
I really believe we will be
able to live as long as we want,
and we will be able to live
healthy as long as we want.
And to me, that is the
purpose worth living for.
>> So when you look
at telomere length,
they say the cap that you
can live is about 120 years.
So that's our genetically
programmed time
to live as long as possible.
And there have been people who
have lived up to 120 years,
but that was without
any technology,
without any medical innovation.
Now we can alter
the genetics, we
can modify the
environment in which
these telomeres are
attritioning, meaning
they're becoming shorter.
So we can modify
that environment.
It's hard to know what the
maximum age will be because 120
years is just our base.
That's what we
have to work with.
That's what the raw materials
that we have in our body.
>> If you were to tell
most physicians or medical
researchers in the year 1900
that we will soon have magic
bullets that cure infectious
diseases, bacterial diseases,
it would have sounded
too optimistic.
>> It seems to me that our
ability to arrest aging is
an inevitability.
Absent any catastrophic
events, stopping progress,
biology is a
engineerable system.
We have increasingly
powerful tools to interrogate
biology, program biology.
It's different, it's more
complex than computer code,
it behaves differently
but there's
no reason to believe
that we will not
be able to arrest aging.
>> All these science
fiction ideas of longevity,
these ideas of living forever,
these ideas of merging
into robots, becoming androids,
all these things actually could
happen.
>> Immortality is already
possible at the level
of the cell, and it's been
that way for a billion years.
At this point, it's just
an engineering challenge
of applying those
learnings to all
of the cells in the human body.
>> For the first
time in history,
we are truly between the
last human mortal generation
and the first human
immortal generation.
>> When science is extending
your life for more than a year,
for every year
that you're alive--
and that concept is called
longevity escape velocity--
your goal should be how do you
live healthfully for the next 10
or 20 years to intercept
the technologies coming
that will then extend your
life the next 10 or 20 years.
Will we ever get to 500 years
of lifespan like the Greenland
shark or 200 years
like the bowhead whale?
Maybe.
But what I feel confident
we can get to is being full
of vitality and energy
and strong cognition,
aesthetics, mobility
at 100, maybe 120.
>> That sounds like
magic, sounds crazy.
Ray Kurzweil has been talking
about this for 30 years.
He's been the most accurate
forecaster in the world
for any form of technology.
I just talked to him the other
day, we're right on target.
And imagine what's
happening with AI.
So there's so many
breakthroughs that are coming
and so much money being invested
by some of the wealthiest
people in the world
who understand money
isn't everything because
if you're not here,
you don't have anything.
So Silicon Valley is
obsessed with this area.
>> I mean, since I was a kid,
I was a punk, hardcore kid.
Like, the punk motto is
live fast, die young.
I changed that motto.
I mean, once I knew
the possibility
of living indefinitely, I'm
like, I don't want to live fast,
die young.
I want to live fast, die never.
>> I believe with
the current advances,
in 10 years we'll be
able to stop aging.
I have full faith in the
ingenuity of our scientists.
I believe it's possible.
I believe that if they
can do it to mice today,
then they'll be able
to do it to humans.
We're not that different.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Things are going
to be exponential,
so I'm very comfortable to say
that the next 10 years I'll be
able to enjoy the fruit of
this research pretty nicely.
And I'm looking forward to that.
>> For me I think
there's no way to tell.
So, I mean, it's
amazing what humans
are capable of doing that we
never thought was possible,
but I think anyone who truly
says they know whether we can
or can't I think is
probably mistaken,
because there's no way to
predict what the future holds
or what scientific discoveries
are going to come around.
So I think we have to just
work on these hard problems
and wait and see
where they take us.
>> 60s are the new 40s.
You see guys my age in their
60s that can look good,
can be fit and not be limited
in terms of things that they do.
And some people, they can't
put it at the top of their list
simply because of economics.
You have some people,
unfortunately,
have to worry about surviving
as opposed to thriving,
but some of us are
very, very fortunate
and we're able to invest
to look at alternatives,
and hopefully one of
these things clicks.
>> It's happening
before our eyes,
and it's happening at a rate
that we could have never
imagined.
It's wild.
I'm here for it.
I'm excited.
If I can stand on my
own two feet at age 100,
I'll stand on my skateboard.
I might be going slow, but
I'll still stand on it.
>> There's new science at the
forefront that's coming through
now, which is about
reversing aging.
We're not just talking
about slowing aging,
we're actually about
turning back the clock.
>> And people dying
is like book burning.
You're taking all of the
asset, all of the information
that they've learned,
and you're destroying it.
And it's gone.
>> Supplements are a
multi-billion dollar,
unregulated global industry.
And anyone can come up with
their own supplement these days.
So how can we know which
supplements are actually
good for us and which ones could
potentially help with aging?
>> So many people are under
the preconception that a very
healthy diet and exercise is
enough to help with longevity,
and the answer is sort of.
Definitely a good
diet and exercise
will help you avoid
a lot of disease
and it will help you with
longevity to a certain degree,
but it's truly not enough.
We know so much more in the
medical field about cells.
And as an example, we know
that taking pterostilbene,
which comes from blueberries,
activates sirtuins.
And this is extraordinarily
beneficial for longevity.
And people say, oh, I sprinkled
a few blueberries on my salad,
isn't that fantastic?
And the answer is, yeah,
I bet salad tastes great
and it looks very pretty,
unfortunately, it's
not enough blueberries.
You have to eat about three
gallons of blueberries a day
to have full beneficial effects.
>> If you don't have
healthy lifestyle,
I'm not sure these supplements
are going to help you that much.
But second of all, pick
one thing or at most
two things among these
supplements and try them.
And, ideally, you would
measure your biologic age
before and after you
try them as well.
So AKG goes down with age.
It goes down in
animals and in humans.
And we found that if you restore
the AKG levels as you get older,
it has beneficial
effects on aging.
So we're very
interested in trying
to understand the mechanism
by which AKG acts.
But even more so, we want to
get more and more human data
to show that maybe this is
the first natural product that
can actually reverse
biological age in people.
So we're doing clinical
studies to try to test that.
>> When it comes to
longevity supplements,
these are ingredients that
are being demonstrated
in the laboratory and in
clinical studies to be able
to slow down the pace of aging
or to be able to positively
impact the different
hallmarks of aging.
It's a short list,
but ingredients
like alpha-ketoglutarate,
fisetin, glycine,
and so on have been found to
have these very positive effects
on the aging process.
And what's even
more exciting to me
is the combination
of these ingredients.
>> So one of my absolute
favorite things in this category
is astaxanthin.
Comes from algae.
When algae gets angry, meaning
physiologically stressed,
it makes this lovely
pink orange goo.
And that is astaxanthin.
And it protects that cell
from physiologic stress,
especially oxidative stress.
And it protects us
from oxidative stress.
>> There's a database online
called the drug age database.
And this database has more than
2,000 studies cataloged for more
than 1,000 molecules,
from pharmaceuticals
to over-the-counter
natural ingredients,
across 37 different species
that show lifespan extending
characteristics of
these ingredients.
It's the most complete database
in existence for lifespan
extending compounds.
>> As you get older, you have
micronutrient deficiencies,
so you need to make up
those micronutrients,
which is why people
should take multivitamins.
However, an excessive
amount doesn't actually
help with longevity.
It just makes you
not as unhealthy
as you could have been.
>> That's a fun hobby, to take
a lot of supplements a day.
So people who take 70 or
100 supplements a day,
I think they're having
fun with what they do.
I don't think that
we can say it's
doing much good beyond that.
Yes, all of the mechanisms
exist, all of these interactions
are documented, these
supplements do something,
but that something is likely
too small to care about.
>> Most supplements,
the vast majority,
are not longevity supplements.
They might be for some
short-term health benefit,
maybe exercise performance
or focus, or improving libido
or whatever it is that
people are looking for.
And many companies will claim
that their longevity supplements
simply because they are good
for short-term health outcomes,
but that's not,
in fact, the case.
>> So there's lots of
interest, obviously,
in natural products that might
target the biological aging
process.
One of the big advantages
of natural products
is you don't have to do an
FDA clinical trial, right.
So if they work,
it's much easier
to get that to consumers
and to the general public.
The downside is it doesn't
require FDA approval.
Meaning nobody has to
do a clinical trial.
If I had to place
a bet right now,
I would say alpha-ketoglutarate
looks interesting.
There is some reason to believe
that alpha ketoglutarate could
potentially have
beneficial effects,
at least in some people,
in the context of aging.
>> If you want to take something
with the full knowledge that it
is experimental and we don't
know for some of these things
even how safe they are, but it's
worth it to you because you have
developed some major chronic
diseases and you're kind
of at a stage where you'll
try anything, I think, again,
as long as you're talking to
your doctor and you're taking
things legally, I
think it's fine.
But, again, just acknowledging
that we don't know
and really understanding
the science of where
things are versus the hype.
>> Vampires using other people's
blood to achieve immortality is
the stuff of folk mythology, but
some scientists today believe
that young blood could actually
help slow down the pace
of aging.
The field of parabiosis,
or plasma exchange,
is definitely a
controversial topic,
but it has many
people intrigued.
>> Parabiosis, which
is young blood,
this is also very important and
incredible advances have been
done in the last
couple of years.
We are identifying what
is good in young blood
and what is bad in old blood,
and we will soon discover really
the key elements
to rejuvenate blood
because blood goes
throughout the body
and it will allow the
body to stay younger.
>> Actually, blood plasma is
something that is very scalable.
Blood transfusions happen all
around the world every day,
and I think that
that's going to be
a very important part of
having systemic rejuvenation.
And we see that these therapies
are really going to come through
within the next five years.
>> There's a history of
literature showing that if you
take blood from a young mouse
and give that to an old mouse--
this is often done surgically
through a process called
parabiosis-- that that can
actually have beneficial effects
on the old mouse.
Interestingly, when you
connect the circulatory system
of a young mouse
with an old mouse,
it has detrimental effects
on the young mouse.
Obviously, surgically attaching
a young person to an old person
isn't going to fly,
so the alternative
would be transfusions, plasma
transfusions, for example.
I don't think there's much
evidence yet in people
that that has significant
beneficial effects
but, again, it's pretty
early and only very,
very small uncontrolled
trials have been done.
But, again, I think from
a feasibility perspective,
if we're trying to think
about an intervention that
could be useful for hundreds
of millions of people, that's
just not very pragmatic.
So I think that the direction
that many people are trying
to go is to identify what
are the specific factors
in the blood that are
accounting for these effects,
and then you could do a
much more targeted approach.
>> I do hear a lot of people
talking about getting young
people's plasma, and
certainly that can be done.
It's typically done in a
clinical trial setting where
you get rid of your
old plasma and you
get young plasma in return.
From the data we have so far,
getting young people's plasma
really didn't make
a big difference.
It was simply the
process of getting
rid of old plasma that really
made a difference from an aging
standpoint.
>> If you have too many
inflammatory markers or toxins
in your blood, it's going to
increase your propensity towards
aging.
Plasmapheresis helps us do that.
It removes some of these
toxins, inflammatory markers
from your blood,
and we replenish it
with healthy serum,
albumin, basically.
>> Perhaps we can
slow down aging,
the disease of aging by
getting rid of our old plasma.
>> Gene therapy sounds scary.
Altering a person's
genome could obviously
have unforeseen consequences.
But despite the
unknowns, there seemed
to be exciting paths
for these technologies
when it comes to
longevity and aging.
>> I think CRISPR
is very exciting.
I think like anything,
it's like AI.
It can also create
some challenges too.
I'm not just a blind
optimist, but if you
look at human history,
electricity can light up a city
or it can kill somebody.
So I think these
technologies have
to be monitored but the
opportunity with CRISPR
to, for example, have children
now that can see again
that were blind, that's
actually happening as we speak.
>> We sequence the human
genome back 20 years ago,
it used to cost $1 billion.
And take a year to
sequence a single genome,
it's dropped from billions of
dollars to hundreds of dollars,
and from a year to seven hours.
So we're going to sequence
every person's genome.
As a baby is born, their
genome will be sequenced
and we'll understand what
are they likely to come down
with as disease.
Can we solve it in advance?
>> You, of course, can
optimize healthspan,
you can slow your
speed of aging,
but if we want to prolong
life in any meaningful way,
we're going to have to get gene
therapies working robustly.
>> As humans, really, we
can only live to 120, 122,
and really we need something
at a genetic level to be able
to change that, to be
able to be living older.
So we see that
gene therapies are
going to be a very important
part of the longevity agenda.
>> Most people understand
that exercise is the best way
to fight the aging process.
What if we could give
you an injection that
can help to increase your bone
density, your lean body mass,
it can extend your
lifespan by 30%
and it can almost
trick your body
into feeling like it's
exercising at a cellular level
without you actually exercising?
That's the promise of
the follistatin gene
therapy and other
gene therapies that
are currently being developed.
And it's the world's first
reversible gene therapy,
which means that you
can take an antibiotic
and you can get it out
of your body at any time.
There's no other gene therapy in
the world that can be reversed.
Right now, as with any new
technology, it's expensive.
But Moore's law will apply,
which means the manufacturing
process to make these gene
therapies will become better.
And as that process becomes
better, it becomes cheaper.
And so within 10 years,
I envision a future
where this will be democratized
and accessible to everyone.
>> So I believe that we don't
need to be subjected to just
the laws of evolution anymore.
We can control it.
And I think that even though
survival of the species
is better if we
knock off the old,
I think we can figure out a
way for the human species,
and our pets too,
to survive even
without the old
being knocked off.
>> In any industry, there are
scams and shady practices.
And in the health and longevity
space, it's no different.
So what can your
average person do
to help differentiate good
science from bad science,
and promising therapies
from straight out scams?
>> Everybody wants to
sell you something.
And the people who don't want
to sell you things, they all
have a different opinion.
So, ultimately,
you're going to have
to learn how to read the
scientific literature
and how to form your
own opinions based
on that primary data.
>> We're trying to distinct
between anti-aging and between
zero therapeutics
or geroscience.
It's a major problem
because a lot
of the people in the anti-aging
are charlatans knowingly.
In other words, they
tell you, take that
and you'll live forever.
And you take it and you
die, nobody sues them.
Or a they're not
really charlatans,
but they're thinking
that they have a promise.
But they haven't shown that
this promise is working.
>> If we can't find robust
evidence to support it,
then we don't do it.
In the current culture
of health and wellness,
there's a lot of
participation in things that
don't have scientific evidence.
It may work, it may not.
We are a group that works on
scientific evidence and data.
>> Well, the science of
longevity before five to 10
years ago was garbage.
And whatever people
were talking about
was probably not very accurate.
Perhaps well-intended,
but not very accurate.
And the population is
just sitting ducks.
And I think that's
putting a really bad slant
on longevity science because
that's just entrepreneurship.
That's people wanting to
make money from people
that don't know anything.
So I think right now people have
to understand several things.
Number one, the science is real.
We're no longer these
crazy crackpot scientists
thinking about a world
that's non-existent.
You can improve your health and
you can improve your longevity.
How do you do that?
That's a great question
because everyone
has a different answer for it.
For real longevity and
cellular optimization and then
reevaluating what
your cells do need
rather than just throwing in
everything that you don't need.
>> One thing that we can say
is that the promise of life
extension is mostly a promise.
Is not yet possible
to deliver upon,
may never be possible
and yet there are going to
be a lot of buying customers.
>> The field of anti-aging has
more quacks and charlatans than
any field ever.
People for thousands
of years have
been touting cure aging
products that don't really work.
The bottom line is, even
in scientific peer reviewed
studies, you can find
support for anything
you wish to be true.
A lot of people will
force some study
to get published just so
they can market a product.
>> It's an interesting field
to work in because it really is
at that interface of really
rock solid, rigorous science.
There's plenty of
that in the field.
And then at the other end
there's pure snake oil.
>> Talk to two scientists,
they will give you two totally
different answers about aging
and what to do about it.
Talk to two self-experimenters
and one of them
will be trying to
sell you something,
and the other one won't know
what they're talking about.
>> No matter where you're
from or what your beliefs are,
we can all agree that life is a
gift that should be cherished.
The people working in longevity
and life extension fields
want to extend that
gift for humanity.
Whether they can achieve
it remains to be seen,
but if they succeed, it would
bring a new horizon to humanity
where diseases of aging
become a thing of the past.
>> To me, aging is just being
who you are regardless of what
the number is.
>> We're giving people more
years with the people they love.
We're giving them more years
to work and be productive.
We're giving them more
years to do what they love.
So when we're investing in
longevity, what we're really
doing is making society better.
>> I can't say what the future
of longevity science holds
for us, but I think with all
the great minds working on it,
it's going to probably
be pretty amazing.
>> So anti-aging to me
is not the end goal,
it's what it represents, that
we as a species become more
peaceful and compassionate.
And we can focus our
energies less on indulging
in these meaningless,
self-destructive behaviors
and more on this
wide-open frontier where
we say yes to the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]